---
layout: post
title: Magnolia 
date:   2018-03-09
description: Thoughts on Paul Thomas Anderson's extraordinarily personal masterpiece, "Magnolia". 
---

> <strong>Interviewer</strong>: In your mind, what is that movie about? Like if you were to say one poetic line… Give me a haiku.<br/><br/><strong>PTA</strong>: My dad.<br/><br/><strong>Interviewer</strong>: The whole thing?<br/><br/><strong>PTA</strong>: Yeah. Yeah, for sure. I mean, I just lost my dad, and I wrote a movie. It was like that. And I remember talking to an oncologist on the phone who was essentially telling me that there was no way that my dad was going to make it. And one of the first things that popped into my mind was, “You know, you’re telling me that frogs are falling from the sky.”<br/><br/>(Excerpted from Marc Maron's "WTF with Marc Maron", <a href='http://www.wtfpod.com/podcast/episodes/episode_565_-_paul_thomas_anderson' target='_blank'>Episode 565</a>)

That’s about as great an explanation of a film as I have ever heard. 

<a href='http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000759/' target='_blank'>Paul Thomas Anderson</a>'s <a href='http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0175880/' target='_blank'><em>Magnolia</em></a> is a movie about the fact that strange things happen <em>all the time</em>. Ricky Jay tells us exactly that, <em>twice</em> -- first at the beginning of the film, and then again near the end. We should have known. But in the two and a half hours between the prologue and the rain of frogs, we get distracted from the truth. We become involved in the lives of all of these different characters and convince ourselves that they’re all unified by universal themes and ideas. We attribute the similarities in their predicaments to coincidence and chance. 

And then frogs rain from the sky, and a little boy named Stanley <a href='https://youtu.be/zQKre8_v1_Y' target='_blank'>looks out at the scene</a> with prophetic serenity, and we’re reminded of what the film has always been about. “This happens,” Stanley observes, as moonlight projects silhouettes of falling frogs on the wall behind him. “This is something that happens.”

Strange things happen. They happen all the time. And, in their happening, they send us reeling in search of meaning, understanding, and acceptance. Why? Because our perspectives are baffingly. limited. We can't help but experience the world in terms of things happening, or not happening, to <em>us</em>. We cling to notions such as "coincidence" and "chance" to explain events born of external design. But if we could see the earth from the moon we might see that everything and nothing is coincidencental. And then maybe we wouldn't find it so odd that frogs sometimes fall from the sky, or that dozens of different people sometimes sing the same song at the same time without knowing it.

<a href='https://youtu.be/dDMdzg_QmxM' target='_blank'>This scene</a> from the film stands out to me as representative of that idea. It’s a single tracking shot. Because it’s sustained and uninterrupted, it conveys a sense of urgency that suits its central action: “Stanley is whisked through backstage corridors in order to get ready for his imminent appearance on a game show.” 

But the shot also conveys multiple perspectives. The camera begins by following Stanley and his father. Then a producer joins. Then she and Stanley break away and the camera follows Stanley’s father alone, and then a stage hand, and then Stanley and the producer again, and then an assistant. In an immediate context, the shot is about the coordinated behind-the-scenes madness surrounding Stanley in the lead up to “show time”. In the context of the whole movie, it's also about the dizzying intersection of lives, the idea that everything and nothing is coincidencental. 


Sometimes you round a corner and run into exactly the person you had wanted to see. Sometimes you make a call searching for the long-lost son of a dying man and you manage to get him on the line. Sometimes you find out that your dad is dying. 

And frogs fall from the sky. And so on and so on. These are all things that happen.
