---
layout: post
title: Call Me by Your Name 
date:   2018-02-11
description: Thoughts on Luca Guadagnino's "Call Me by Your Name" and the miraculousness of movies. 
---

By inviting us to <em>watch</em>, movies involve us in the revolutionary act of discerning inner lives that are not our own. They show us the interactions <em>between</em> inner lives -- the stances that people take toward one another, often without knowing it. The best movies do this with an open heart. They help us understand that these stances exist between all of us, all sentient beings, merely as a result of our inability to be sentient together, in exactly the same way. 

In my opinion, movies are uniquely capable of doing this. They’re the closest we have to the reenactment of dreams, of memory. And in their unfolding, twenty four frames per second, one second after the next, they mimic our own experience of experiencing -- each of us the sole audience member at the lifelong screening of our lives.

Of course, when we watch movies, we generally don’t think about all this. We either enjoy a film or we don’t. We’re moved or we’re not. But after the most indelible, most satisfying of moviegoing experiences, I think we can sense the miraculousness of what movies are able to achieve through the mysteries of their craft. We can sense the power inherent in their capacity to show us a human face -- many meters tall, larger than we ever ordinarily look at human faces -- in a way that suggests what could be going on just beyond its skin and bone... and then show us another human face looking back at the first, in a way that communicates what is beyond the reach of words. 

[Luca Guadagnino](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0345174/)’s [<em>Call Me by Your Name</em>](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt5726616/) is an extraordinary recent example of this, of everything I’ve been writing about. It is compassionate, intelligent, and wise. It displays genuine affection toward its characters and has a sensitive grasp on the ways in which they relate to one another.

Because of its skill in translating all of this through visual means, it is genuinely moving, and amplifying its power is [Timotheé Chalamet](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3154303/)’s astonishing performance as Elio, whose point of view predominates the film. Chalamet is transparent, instinctual, simultaneously expressive and interior, all without ever appearing to “act.” He simply <em>is</em> Elio. A precocious, curious boy who, for all his classical sophistication, behaves with a charming innocence and sincerity when confronted with the pangs of first love and desire.

Over the course of the film, we watch him reconcile his own exploding inner life with his feelings about Oliver, just as we watch Oliver (played by [Armie Hammer](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2309517/)) adapt under Elio’s shifting gaze -- a "usurper” or “traitor” in one moment, an object of desire in the next. Ultimately, we witness the evolution of a profound mutuality between these two characters. 

Guadagnino conveys this mutuality in myriad ways. The push and pull of early infatuation. The sensory overload of a harmless but intentional touch. After a series of memorable bike rides, a shot of bike handles intertwined. The Star of David in Elio’s mouth as he bobs out of the water wearing Oliver’s necklace. All of it culminating in a fantastic upside-down shot of Elio and Oliver staring at each other in bed during the moment in which the film’s title -- a literal expression of mutuality -- is uttered out loud: “Call me by your name, and I’ll call you by mine.” It is no coincidence that, if the shot were right-side-up, Elio’s face would be where Oliver’s is, and vice-versa.

There is more. Oliver’s blue shirt, which Elio begins wearing and, literally, begins <em>growing into</em>. And the great [Piave memorial scene](https://www.nytimes.com/video/movies/100000005566881/call-me-by-your-name-scene-luca-guadagnino.html), which is all about the negotiation of emotional and physical distance, in which [<em>Une barque sur l'océan</em>](https://youtu.be/bTYUyDjVCRU) creeps into the soundtrack when Elio and Oliver are apart and recedes when they are together, in which the camera follows Elio’s gaze upward at the battle monument, at the Italian flag behind it, at the cross on top of a nearby church. War, country, religion -- big, distancing forces in a world full of small people struggling even to be close to those who are right in front of them.

I didn’t actively pick these details apart the first time I saw the film; I simply <em>felt</em> their collective importance. I also felt the weight of time, which, together with Elio and Oliver’s profound mutuality, was my lasting impression from the film. It’s a force from the very beginning, underlying every scene. 

Even in opening shots of the Perlman villa, with its wooden doors and antique furnishings, there is the feeling that the place has been visited by time. Life moves slowly from hour to hour, from one room to the next, from outside on the ground floor to the balconies above. However, day by day, time appears to slip by much more quickly. One morning’s breakfast turns into the next’s. A night spent out dancing turns into another night entertaining house guests in the living room. It’s just another one of those summers, the film seems to say. All you can do is wait for it to end, then wait for it to come back again, a sentiment that Oliver and Elio both express early on. 

They are both vigilant about time in this movie, about plans taking place at this time or that. But their vigilance doesn’t prepare them for time’s essential tragedy: that it passes and can’t be recovered.

This, of course, is what grounds the astonishing final shot of the movie, of Elio in front of the fire, thinking about his relationship with Oliver, putting into practice the wisdom imparted to him by his father (played by the great [Michael Stulhbarg](http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0836121/)) just a few scenes before. We can actually <em>see</em> that wisdom being worked on in Chalamet’s head as Mafalda and his mother set the dinner table behind him, as [Sufjan Stevens](http://sufjan.com/) sings “I have loved you for the last time...” over that image. 

We can <em>see</em> Elio assimilating his immediate pain and sorrow with his memories of transcendent love. It’s an indelible moment from an indelible performance, from one of my favorite movies of last year. 
